 Hello there, my name is John Porter. I'm the founder and CEO of Barter Pay. I've been in the Barter Payment space for over two decades helping small businesses to grow their business by leveraging organized bartering. It's so important to help small businesses grow. They're the lifeblood, the backbone of the economy, they employ the most people, contribute the most to GDP and we're so excited to be able to support them in this way. I'm looking forward to chatting with you over the next hour about how organized bartering can help businesses grow and I'm joined by my COO, Gavin Duncan, who's been with me for about 15 years. It was about 15 years ago that I went on the search for a CPA, knew that we needed somebody in our business that was really in tune with the financial growth of our company. And so we brought Gavin in and let's turn over to him for a second here. Sure, so I went to Queen's University and from there I got my designation at Price Retro Scoopers in public accounting. I knew I wanted to get up public accounting. I was originally thinking I wanted to go into something that was more of a tangible product, but ended up in Barter after meeting with John and discussing kind of where Barter can take the economy and help small businesses and charities as well. And just saw his passion in it and over the last 15 years have developed my own as well. So it's been a great experience and definitely want to share this with all of you so you can help your member, your clients as well. Yeah, absolutely. And funny story. One of the things on our criteria when we were searching for a CPA was to make sure that they placed in the top three of the the U.F. exam, the year that they wrote it. And it just so happened that Gavin won the bronze medallion for Ontario and fifth place in Canada the year he wrote the exam. So I know he wouldn't talk about that but I am because he checked out that box in that criteria, which was amazing. Okay, so I just wanted to go over sort of the table of contents as it were. What we're going to be talking about over the next hour. We're going to be covering things like the need for Barter. Why we care about about this in particular, you know, one on one bartering, which is called contra versus sort of the multi directional bartering that we've set up. Types of businesses that can barter and the fact that actually charities can also barter the whole charitable aspect of what we do in social impact and that sort of thing. How to account for it is obviously an extremely important subject to touch on. Taxation, the CRA rules, how to incorporate Barter personally, organized Barter in a business owner's personal transactions. What you can't barter for is also important. What you can barter for. We're going to talk about real life examples, you know, case studies and you know, real life stories of how businesses have actually used Barter and organized Barter to actually grow their business and offset costs. And then we're going to actually give you a really tangible piece of information at the end and assessment tool. And then this assessment tool, it's going to have things like is Barter right for a business or what makes it right for a business. What to look for, those types of things. The basic steps and rules for setting up accounting for Barter transactions, you know, ways to maximize Barter. Why some businesses aren't successful at using Barter. You know, Barter is for every business, but not every business owner kind of makes organized Bartering work. That sort of thing. What to look for in a Barter company, in an organized Bartering system, you know, the top five or six things to really look for to make sure that Barter system that you're recommending potentially to one of your clients is going to be a successful relationship. So those are the types of things that we're going to cover. And yeah, we're just glad that you're here with us and we look forward to having this conversation open next hour or so. Thanks for that. I think in that line of where we're going with this. I think that the key thing to start off with is why we're talking about Barter all at all. Why does someone actually even want to learn about how to do accounting attacks? There's obviously the concept doesn't make sense to get a business involved with. Then you're not really going to worry about how to account for it. So I guess just to start off, right? But where, like, what does that other first thing you want to think about when you're thinking about Barter and why? Where Barter fits into the economy? Right. For sure. So I mean, it's a great question and it's great. It's a foundational concept of organized bargaining and that is literally what we define as what's called spheric capacity. Spheric capacity is literally prevalent in every business, whether it was pre-COVID or right now it's just magnified with COVID. Spheric capacity is literally time and space that is not being monetized and or idle inventory that is not being sold. And there's so many businesses right now that are just sitting on a whole bunch of time and space that's not being sold and or idle inventory. So this general concept of spheric capacity, what we even call business waste. And so we really want to teach businesses about how to convert that unrealized value into value and how do they do that seamlessly into their business. And organized Barter is one of those solutions that can actually, in this closed loop of Barter economy, they can join the system and immediately expose their business to literally thousands of other ready-willing and able buyers who are sitting on Barter credits that they've previously earned and now they can actually start to interact with those businesses and monetize that spheric capacity. And you also might be asking yourself, what types of businesses would be interested in Bartering and what type of spheric capacity do they have. So there's a bunch of different categories of businesses that we work with, anything from hospitality. If you can picture hotels right now or hotels even before COVID are sitting on a lot of idle inventory right now in terms of unsold hotel rooms or un rented banquet space. That sort of thing, professionals, engineers, architects, CPAs, all sorts of different types of professionals. You can't go back yesterday and get the value of an unbuilt hour. It'd be nice if you could, but time expires, right? So you can't go back yesterday or even an hour ago and get an unbuilt hour. So it's all about monetizing that spheric capacity. Contractors, you know, different businesses have our cyclical or have different times of the year where they're busy, you know, off season and that sort of thing. And so making sure that they can, you know, fill in downtime, maybe they have a canceled job and they've got to, you know, shift their schedule. What they do for that week or two where they now got a career ready but don't have the work to fill it in. That's spheric capacity. Health and wellness is really, really a big part of the whole barter ecosystem, you know, anything from dentists to, you know, massage therapy and chiropractors and just anybody who's booking appointments. Again, a cancel appointment or certain times of the year where they might be a little bit slower. So filling in that spheric capacity or startup, startup business, I'm thinking about like, you know, dentists right now that's just starting out and doesn't have a full practice yet but has all the fixed overhead, you know, around that practice but isn't that full capacity? Well, hey, you know, doing some bartering really makes a lot of sense because they're able to, you know, not only fill capacity but gain new patients which then can turn into referrals and that sort of thing. Another big part of the barter ecosystem is media and advertising, right? Once, once say, you know, if there's an empty billboard, again, you can't go back last month and get the value of that unsold billboard or if you've got like a magazine that's being printed, you know, they've committed to a certain number of pages but they haven't sold out all their advertising. Here, obviously it makes sense to be able to slip in some barter credit deals at that, you know, at that moment in time so they can actually get that value out of that, you know, their fixed cost on their printing, right? So it's really just a matter of, yeah, there's just every business literally has spheric capacity of some sort and we want to help them monetize that. Now pre-COVID versus COVID, I want to talk about that for a second. You know, it used to be that I would talk to say, you know, 10 businesses, talked about organized bartering and, you know, five or six of them would be really interested in the conversation and then once I have a chance to connect with those businesses, we'd have one or two maybe sign up and, you know, want to take advantage of the program. Obviously, again, like I mentioned a little bit earlier, COVID has magnified this issue of spheric capacity and so when we talk to 10 businesses today, you know, seven or eight or nine of them want to have a serious conversation about it and then like five or six or seven of them are signing up to participate because they do have that that magnified spheric capacity and they also have this need to conserve cash. When you can take in barter credits into your account, you can fill that valley, you can fill that spheric capacity at your wholesale cost of goods, you know, fixed overhead is in place. Actually, I wanted to get into a little bit because one of the conversations is I don't have later kind of accounting attack side has to be with the sort of price versus cost discussion. And so maybe just touch on that sort of how to view the value that you're bringing in or when you're assessing a quote down the road with respect to barter versus a cash quote when you're dealing with that as well. Yeah, so price versus cost is a pretty cool concept and it's really boils down to, you know, when you're looking at say three different quotes, if I'm a restaurant owner and I need a new sign. Right? Actually, step into a direct barter scenario, first is the multi-directional side and then we'll bring the multi-directional actor. Okay, good idea. So what's up about one on one bartering or in the corporate world called Contra. So one on one bartering, if I'm a restaurant and I need a new sign, right? I'm going to go and get two or three quotes in the marketplace. Let's say I've got three quotes now sitting in front of me. I've done my due diligence. I've compared apples to apples. I'm at the point where I'm actually going to make a buying decision on which sign company I'm going to have. Anybody got what's five quotes? These are the three that you actually go, I would trust these people to do my sign. That's the everyone you've talked to. It's these are the three that I like. I bolted down to the top three. Any one of them based on, you know, is equal based on their value. They can deliver the timing, the capability, that sort of thing. So I'm down to my last three. If quote number one is 5,000 and quote number two is 5,500 and quote number three is 6,000. Obviously all things considered equal, I'm going to choose quote number one because it's 5,000 is the cheapest. But I decide to kind of get smart and want to incorporate some organized bartering. I want to incorporate one on one bartering. And so what I do is I call up each of the three sign companies and I try and get the owner of the sign company to take a certain portion off the bill in barter, the gift cards. Barter gift cards to my restaurant. And quote number one decides that they don't want to take any gift cards directly from our restaurant. And quote number two decides they'll take 500 dollars in gift cards off the 5,500. So I'd be cutting them a check for 5,500 in gift cards. But the third sign company just happens to want to host a company staff party. And so they decide they're going to take 3,000 of the 6,000 in my own gift cards. So now I have to be like doing some math and just a quick little calculation here because I recognize that all of my fixed overhead to run my restaurant is in place. If I can actually purchase this sign with 3,000 of my heart or in Canadian dollars cash and 3,000 of my own gift cards, my own currency and pay for that sign, well when those gift cards are redeemed back in my restaurant, we call that reciprocity, that's the barter system. First of all it's generating $3,000 in brand new business, unsolicited business. Secondly there's going to be overspent when those gift cards come back. Thirdly, I'm getting a number of new people in my restaurant that are going to maybe take a photo or post it on Instagram and talk about their experience with the party that they were attending. I think there's a lot more people taking take-out. But it's still good. Yeah, this is a party. This is a party coming in from the thing. So now I've got all these new people in my restaurant and it's at my wholesale cost of food because I'm going to actually fit that barter deal in where I've got the empty space and capacity in my restaurant. Therefore I'm able to buy that sign for $3,000 in Canadian dollars and $3,000 of my wholesale food and beverage costs. So $3,000 is my menu price but my wholesale food and beverage cost on that is only about 35%. Just over $1,000 in actual hard cost. That's why a business would want to do a contra or a barter deal because it's forcing the vendor that they're looking to deal with to actually reciprocate and also do business with them. It's creating new, unsolicited business exposure and it's all out my wholesale cost of goods. And then there's also the benefit of obviously those individuals that came through that party might come back and actually spend with their credit card. I think the next party kind of touch on there is sort of the reality that it's not often easy to find those direct deals that work. So I think it's going to work with a multi-directional concept come from and came from in the first place. Maybe touch on that sort of how we move from let's we're going to direct barter deal. So that's kind of working a multi-directional fast. Well, that's the thing, right? It's actually called the coincidence and wants. So for that deal to line up, I had to kind of get a little bit lucky, right? I had to actually stumble across a sign company that also wanted my services at the same time and at the same value and enough of your service, right? Because I see in your example was your second person wanted $500 of the city. Well, that's great. And that helps a bit, but it doesn't help as much as the first one who is wanting $3,000 or even potentially the whole six. Correct. So organized bartering has developed to solve the problem of the coincidence and wants, right? This whole idea of in the whole notion of actual how business was invented, which is the organized organized, we're sorry, one on one bartering is basically how commerce started. And so to get around that, organized bartering systems have created now platforms that allow businesses to join their system, establish an account number. They can now offer up their spare capacity onto the system. Now we all know that cash is still king. It's the oxygen of any business. You cannot run your business on an organized bartering system, but you can definitely enhance your business using organized bartering, leveraging the system. So they can now join the bartering system. They can offer up their spare capacity onto the network in exchange for a barter credit. Now one barter credit equals $1 Canadian dollar for evaluation, accounting, and tax purposes, which we'll get to in a little bit. And so yeah, they can offer up their spare capacity, they can earn barter credits. And now the best part is that regardless of who has acquired their good or service, they can now take this newly earned revenue stream in barter credits that doesn't expire and they can go and utilize it and bartering trade with anybody in the entire ecosystem. So now they're not locked into these cumbersome and lucky deals of finding one on one bartering relationships. It's now a one to many ecosystem where everybody is sharing their resources amongst each other. And the organized bartering system is just the administrator of the system. They're keeping track of the exchange of barter credits in between the members. And sort of like a third-party record keeper is sending a monthly statement to itemize all those transactions, you know, how many how many barter credits they've earned, how much they've spent, their balance in their account, month to date, year to date, that activity, that sort of thing. And then they can tie that back into their, you know, general accounting practices. So I think it's good to apply the organized bartering concept back into that sort of one-on-one deal that we talked about during the signed company and the restaurant trip. And so now by the restaurant being able to join an organized bartering system and connect with his barter coach, right? The first thing we're going to do, like I already talked about, was to start to advertise those restaurant gift cards out in the system. Because we got to accumulate, you know, four or five, $6,000 worth of barter credits for the restaurant. So that's step one. The restaurant joins the barter system. We then do a promotion, boom out to the system. Quickly, we earned that restaurant 5,000 barter credits into their account by selling off their gift cards to other members of the exchange. Now, on the flip side, that restaurant is going to still go and get the two or three poles like normal, right? But they're also going to connect with their barter coach and find a signed company who's in the barter system who's willing to take all or portion in barter credits. And so it just so happens, you know, this time the quote number one was 5,000. Quote number two was 5,500 and quote number three was 6,000. But quote number two, 5,500 decides that they'll take the entire amount in barter credits. So the restaurant obviously is going to make the smart choice to go with the the barter credit quote. Sure. Because now we can pay the entire amount in barter credits, which is the equivalent of his 5,500 worth of his food cost. Right? We've already talked about. So go go and go again. I think sometimes some people get confused when as soon as you move into barter credits, so they hear the 5,500 and they kind of think, well, that's my cash now. So let's maybe just talk about that. It's just a second about kind of that that concept of the food cost still applies to the barter credit side. Right. So, you know, as a restaurant owner, would I rather cut a check out of my hard earned cash, my regular sales, and then pay 5,000 dollars in Canadian dollars for the sign? But would I rather issue 5,500 dollars worth of my gift cards new, incremental revenue coming in my door reciprocity, right? In the system. And so I'd much rather issue 5,500 of my gift cards to cover up the sign. Because when those gift cards now come back to my location and there's reciprocation and they're spent, again, there's going to be overspend in Canadian dollars. There's going to be more awareness of my restaurant. There's going to be people coming back as repeat customers. There may, there's definitely going to be non-reduction. That obviously creates an extra margin right on the spot. There's not thematically. So it's, there's so many benefits to going with the 5,500 in barter credits versus cutting a check for 5,000 dollars in Canadian dollars. I mean, in some words, I think about it, you're kind of doing 5,500 dollars in new business at a cost of 35% about 35%. So about 52 grand. Probably 2 grand. Whereas if you were to go the other route, say, well, okay, well, how much in new business and cash am I going to have to do to free up 5,500? Right. So you're free of 5,000. Sorry, 5,000. Yes, yes. Basically, it's so much more absolutely than just the barter business that you're bringing on. Well, an restaurant really operates on a pre-tax margin of only about 8 to 10 points. So essentially they have to do $50,000 worth of business to free up the 5 grand to go and buy the sign. Or they can do $5,500 over the gift cards and get the sign. That their wholesale cost of food, right? 2 grand. So it's huge, huge savings. So that's the reason and not to mention, it's just again, it's back to the coincidence of wants, right? I can spend all day as a restaurant owner trying to find a sign company that wants my gift cards. Or I can make one call to the to the barter system and work with my barter coach and could have that deal put together inside a few hours. Right. Well, I'm continuing to run my business. Right. And so that's the advantage. Now, the sign company, I've progressed with ours and they've got so much free time. So they want to do that extra time calling, okay, or else they're saying, of course, of course, they love that. They love administration. Yeah. So just to drive at home, though, because the missing part of the equation is, what does the sign company going to do? Right. Because now they've got 5,500 barter credits in their account. And so that sign company now has accumulated those 5,500 in barter credits and they're happy to because they're they're landing a job that they wouldn't have gotten otherwise. Right. Because otherwise it would have gotten a five dollar otherwise it would have gotten a lowest quote. But because they've chosen to barter, it shifts the business to them. And so that's brand new incremental business for them in barter credits. So now that's the the sign company says, okay, I'm going to take in these 5,500 new barter credits. My sign truck is showing up at that busy restaurant installing the sign, you know, getting some exposure there. But besides that, just mathematically, I can now take this new year and 5,500 in barter credits as a sign company. And now I can start to offset cash expenditure within my business. So now I get on the phone with my barter coach, likely somebody else. And I start to give them my wish list of things that I'm looking for. And you know, I need a video done for my corporate video. I want a new website and I want to get some vehicle repairs to my sign trucks. And so then I work with my barter coach, they connect with other people in the barter system, other vendors. And I'm able to use my barter credits to offset those cash expenditures for me at my wholesale cost of goods of producing that sign. Again, maybe 50 cents on the dollar, right? Yeah. One of the things I love about barter, so in this example, kind of talked about is this person was going to be spending the cash anyway, basically, we're just kind of shifting the deal between one vendor or another vendor. What I love is that it actually oftentimes creates a deal that wouldn't have happened at all. So it doesn't that the restaurant had 5,000 sitting around their waiting paper a sign. They might have been looking at the sign going, I need you to sign, what do I do? Right. And so basically by introducing barter into the concept, all of a sudden we're bringing them that new business, that they can actually afford to do the sign. And now that the sign company's taken on that and it's now able to, maybe they weren't going to have the budget to put to a video. Maybe they weren't going to have the budget to be advertising or those other things they will look to do. And by bartering, we've created that avenue that they can all do those things and that velocity can now happen in the economy that was not happening at all. So it isn't even just what shifting between the vendor or vet that vendor, which is great from a competitive advantage standpoint for somebody who participates. Yep. But it's actually creating more in the economy as a whole. 100%. There are absolutely, I would say, at least half of the transactions that we put together in our bartering ecosystem are transactions that likely would not have happened otherwise. Right. So by being able to fill that spare capacity, that we've already talked about, with barter credits at my whole cell cost of goods, essentially it's creating a budget for me to do things that I might not have been able to afford to do, likely I wouldn't have. Or if I choose to just replace costs, I'm now saving and adding to my bottom line. Right. I'm just using my bottom line. But definitely lots of businesses are able to do more because they're able to leverage barter credits to cover the cost versus actually cutting a chefe out of their hard earned cash, which to your point does accelerate the economy and creates more business. So Gavin, I thought why it doesn't have business, whether they're a service based business, time and space, or hard goods, product based business, why don't they just sell all their value out to the marketplace? Like obviously, I've already mentioned cash is still king. It's the auction of your business might just sell it. Well, I mean most of them just want to hold on to their products and services don't want to sell them. No, really, it's just that they've tapped out on their regular channels. They whatever their normal marketing is that they want to do, they've done that. They might have done some discounting already in terms of like different sales and things, but they kind of reach more, they don't necessarily want to discount it further because that's losing value or I mean, you think some goods where they brought it in it, let's say $100, and they started off with a $200 retail. Now they're, why were they discounted it, maybe even another $150, but they don't want to close their costs. They close their costs. They don't want to send a message because usually when someone's discounted around, they're still marketing to their same customer base. And now all you're teaching is teaching your customer base to wait for the discount. Right. Training them to their number one. Yeah. If their only, if that customer base has, let's say it's a clothing store and that clothing that person says, I have a $1,000 budget a year for close, but by $150 or $200 per item, I still have the same budget. So I'm kind of happy out of my $1,000. So in the conventional market, you're sort of, you've done everything you can do. And so you're kind of looking at what's my next step. I mean, some places go and send a concept to a liquidator. They might do other discount sales, but they're looking for other channels to utilize them. I mean, obviously, you would know because you've been consulting with them for so long that barters that is often another channel or that they can move that could chunk itself. And man, it's still not necessarily 100% of their excess value will go through bar or even. There's no guarantee that it will happen. But I know that maybe talk to us a couple examples. Yeah. I will, for sure. And we always say that, you know, cash is still king, but barter is greater than zero. Right? Cash is still king when it comes to selling out hotel rooms or professional billowl hours or massage therapy time or dental chair. But barter is greater than the alternative, which is having zero value or possibly even a major discount on that time or space. On the hard goods side, it's a little bit, you know, they have a little bit of an easier time with it because there's at least shelf life when it comes to hard goods. Right? The value doesn't just expire right away. But having it on the shelf is actually a negative because you're trying to bring in the next season. Next season. You're paying for storage. Yeah. Yeah. It could be a unit where you're like, I don't know what, I think it was a hot-to-place we had at one time where they had a whole unit that was full of like, I think it was pool tables actually had. But yeah. That they had a full of this stuff. It's like, well, we're paying rent on this gigantic unit. They weren't even marketing the pool tables anymore. Yeah. And their regular business because it just didn't fit in line with what they were trying to do. So they're sort of having them sit there. It's like, well, we don't want to just throw them out because obviously we paid for all of them. Yeah. But there are some costs for them. But not just the some costs. They're every month an additional rental cost for the space. They're out of pocket cash for every month exactly. So yeah, I mean, just to piggyback on that example with the pool tables, we were able to market those pool tables out to the system. I believe we sold approximately $120,000 worth of the pool tables. So that company was able to bank those barter credits at the retail value. And they flipped it into marketing for their location. They're in Burlington Oakville. A new sign printing staff appreciation, tent rentals for their their annual parking lot sale. Like all sorts of security. We got the security for that and security systems around their location. A forklift truck. I mean, they were able to literally take those pool tables that were sitting in a warehouse, storage unit, costing the business money, almost forgotten about. And they were to take that value, put it down to the barter ecosystem, get those barter credits and immediately replace $100,000 over $100,000 worth of real cash expenditures, which was a huge boost to their bottom line. I don't keep the good examples. And literally they've been sitting on those for, they could sound the barter credits for three years. So they were sitting on the pool tables for that amount. Yeah. And you'll be saving the money. Absolutely. Which is the kind of the crazy bar that is not having something in saving money. Exactly. I totally agree. So a couple of quick examples. I remember working with a business travel company up in Ottawa. And they had actually, they do European river cruises in the soya charge the entire boat. And they had sold out enough of the cabins that they were quite profitable with the trip. But they still had 10 or 12 cabins in each cab, which was worth about $6,000 each. And so she tried again the different channels to try and sell them. She didn't really want to advertise as a discount because that's not fair to the people who had just paid for a cabin. And so again, she made the smart choice. She joined the barter system. She was able to take advantage of the barter blast that we did to promote that across the system. And I think we sold about $45,000 worth of the cabins. I think it was about six or seven cabins. And so she was able to take those barter credits and now has those bottled up in an account at full value. And again, her entire cost for the boat was fixed. She was chartering the entire boat. So there was no actual additional out of pocket incremental Canadian dollar cash cost to earn those barter credits. And now she has those for marketing, for different things that she's going to do in the future. So huge. And I think in that case it worked out for her because it definitely worked out for her. But she did that, obviously pre-COVID. And then she's actually been able to utilize those barter credits, obviously cost right now. Obviously river curses are not exactly the most valuable thing in the world. Unfortunately, but so she's been able to utilize the barter credits in this time, or to cur it up her business. Yeah. And personally as well. Yeah. Another example of the hard gets business we had was a building supply company. And they were sitting on literally thousands of dollars, about $8,000 worth of bricks that had been sitting for over five years in their yard. And when they met the barter pay system, the barter system, they were able to actually join over up their account. We went through a little walk in their in their yard. They highlighted some of the skins that were available. We took some photos, blasted it out, and actually within 48 hours we had two different businesses, one in Hamilton and one in Burlington that actually bought those bricks. One was building outdoor patio, one wanted kind of a space in their office that had sort of a brick wall. And those bricks found a home at the full retail value. So that building supply company was able to take in barter credits at the full retail value. And then he actually turned around and donated them to a charity. Through our barter paid forward foundation. They went back out to the community. So we're going to touch on that a little bit about how bartering, organized bartering works for charities and how that can help businesses with their social impact, which is a huge huge advantage in the marketplace as well. So basically you get a brick wall with where it puts those bricks and they became a brick wall. Exactly. So the kind of thing about this, what types of business or what sizes of business are like, is this for like small, big, like what is barter fit in? Sort of a spectrum? Yeah. Yeah, well great question. And I've already kind of touched on this whole idea of, organized bartering works for every business, but not every business owner makes organized bartering work. Sure. Or even one-on-one bartering. You kind of have the mindset and the princity towards it or you don't. We can train and teach and obviously we want to make business owners aware of the concept and why it makes sets. But for the most part, it's the business owners that have that positive creative mindset towards bartering that love working with an organized bartering system. So, but to answer your question, it's anything from a small, small home-based solo printer right up to a multi-national corporation. I mean, contra in the contra world happens with these billion dollar deals happening all the time around the world for media and hard goods and all sorts of different transactions that are happening in that space. But as a couple of examples, we dealt with a small home-based business and she was in the jewelry business. So she makes handmade jewelry as a solo printer. And former teacher actually became an entrepreneur and she over the last five or six years has actually bartered over $110,000 worth of handmade jewelry onto the barter pay system in exchange for barter credits. And she's been able to take in those barter credits and use them for advertising, dental services, you know, to repair her vehicle, you know, gifts for her family members and other friends, travel, all sorts of different things, right? And be able to offset costs at her wholesale cost of that jewelry. And she's been exposed to a whole new marketplace of customers now. In fact, she even has some other retail barter businesses that are part of the barter system that are now buying her product and actually even reselling it, which is giving her even that much more exposure into the marketplace. So really, really great for her. And there's all sorts of small little tiny businesses that we deal with right on up to even recently when the pandemic hit. We got contacted by a very, you know, the second largest food supplier in Canada. And they actually were sitting on a whole bunch of food that was going to go bad that they called their code date. And so they quickly assembled a little team internally. They got to learn about how organized bartering can help solve that problem. And in fact, they actually joined the system. And we quickly monetized almost just over a quarter million dollars worth of food into barter credits at their full wholesale value, their regular price. And they've been able to a few months later now take that newly earned barter credit stream and that new revenue, incremental revenue, and actually turn it into, you know, corporate apparel. They've been able to do a course on some video production for their team in HR. They're able to purchase gifts for all of their employees across Canada and their kids. These are things that now they're able to wear that lie item in the budget might have gotten scrapped because of bleeding cash. They're now able to help out all of their team members across the country and actually, you know, give them a big pat on the back with some of these extra incentives again because they're not having to use cash. So you think of everything in between, I mean, like we've talked about it already, anything in the health and wellness massage therapy, you know, larger firms, accounting firms even, right? We've got some accounting firms that do a lot of organized bartering and they might have, you know, five or six associates that have some capacity, right? And they're in their schedules. And if they're being paid a fixed salary, they might well be leveraging that spare capacity and filling in with barter credit business and new accounts and that sort of thing. But oh yeah, like it's like, you know, media companies and small and large home-based web developers up to, you know, larger marketing firms. It really doesn't matter. I get it all boils down to the mindset of the business owner. Or in the case of a larger business, like the manager of the business owner. The manager of the business owner themselves, because obviously in that case, there's shareholders not who aren't involved in decision at all. It's sort of the upper management having that mindset and saying, okay, this is something that works for our organization and we're going to incorporate it in. Yeah, I made the word for us. Exactly. Exactly. And then I obviously right now in the equate economy is there are a lot of companies with bad cash flow. But just in general concept of a barter. Like is barter for someone who's just got bad cash flow or someone who's got good cash flow? Where does that sort of? Yeah, great. Another great question. Well, it's a barter. Organized bartering isn't a fix to a bad business model already. So if a business is really, really struggling with cash flow, bartering can actually almost work against them to be quite honest at the beginning because as they're putting out their time or space and or goods or service or goods, they're able to absorb that cost of goods soul, which is a negative on their cash flow. So if they've already got bad cash flow and they've got to absorb that cost of goods when they barter, that can kind of sort of magnify the problem. Having said that, if a business does have some bad cash flow and wants to participate with organized barter, it still works. They just have to be cognizant of that cost of goods. And by that I mean, making sure that as they're taking in barter credits, they're already working closely with their barter coach to make sure that they can flip those barter credits into cost replacement in a very, very short time frame. They're not buying the pool table that to enjoy at home and in their case unless they want to go to business, they need to buy things where okay, I was going to do this advertising and instead of paying cash, I'm not doing outguising with barter instead. They have to make sure that all of their barter credits that they accumulate for their timing space and or the goods that are sitting idle are being plugged right back into areas where they legitimately were actually going to be writing a check. And I think it's an important part when we're consulting with them or when any one of their business consultants are consulting with them to make sure that they're aware of that. So there is a cost to doing barter, but it doesn't mean that you can't find advantages even if you are at a bad cash flow. Exactly. Exactly. Then what about the great cash flow? Why would they bother? They've already got great cash flow. Yeah, well, if they've got great cash flow, they want to keep that cash and utilize it to expanding grow their business. Keep the cash in the bank to do the things you can't barter for. Right? So anybody who's got a lot of great cash flow, they're a successful business. We love working with those types of businesses. Number one, they generally are purchasing more things. They're growing their business. They're maybe building a new building or they're just hiring more staff, which requires more office furniture. They're in spend mode and growth mode. We love working with companies like that because there's just so many more things that we can help them replace with barter credits versus Canadian dollars, which is again, is a boost to their bottom line. They love that. But it's yeah, it's also exposing them to a whole new marketplace. And whenever they're growing and they're ratcheting up their capacity, that's when they actually have spare capacity. Right? And so that makes the most sense to actually to barter at that moment in time. Sure. And that basically means somebody who's starting up, obviously, isn't that place. But also someone who's, they might be 15 years in and they're just sitting the next way of a growth that could still be in that same, it's almost like a startup phase again. Yeah. Exactly. It's all about keeping cash in the bank. Even the most successful businesses, you know, want to want to actually create the most amount of cash flow possible. And the most amount of cash reserves possible. Sure. And by leveraging a barter system, they're able to, you know, make that happen to Gina. Yeah. Exactly. On a bigger scale. So it's all good. So with business with bad cash, like, is there a way or if they can't run that say barter fast enough or what they need to spend on it? Is there a way for them to get a financing or a loan or it's not? How does that work? Is there a course I think you have to like earn first? Yeah, no great question. Obviously, the priority when a business joins a bartering system is that the system is going to actually advertise their services out of the network. That's number one. That's bringing them new businesses fast as possible. But your question is, can a business actually go and spend barter credits in advance of actually earning them? And the answer is yes. They would simply apply in our case for a barter loan. So what that would mean is that they're able to actually have barter credits deposited into their account from barter pay are a low account. So they're able to take those barter credits into their account, go get some things that they need on the system, and then of course they don't have to pay off that loan with money. Canadian dollars, they simply pay off the loan by providing their products and services back out to the system. They earn the barter credits back and they use those to pay off their loan at their wholesale cost of goods. We actually had a great example of this was a restaurant in Hamilton. We had this restaurant that was literally looking to build another location just down the street. But to build that location, they had to get a bill increment and to get the bill increment, they had to get some engineered drawings, the stamped drawings. And so they were literally, when I met them, they were about to spend $25,000 of their harder cash on the engineering service. And instead, once I had a chance to chat with them a little bit, they decided obviously to open up a barter pay account. We were able to arrange for them to have a $25,000 barter credit loan. So we actually deposited 25,000 barter credits into their account in advance. They went and used those barter credits with an account, sorry, with an engineering firm that was already part of the barter pay ecosystem and offset that cash expenditure. So they were able to keep that $25,000 cash in the bank and instead utilized 25,000 in barter credits to obtain that service. Over the course of time, the next year or two, all they did was simply let their barter coach advertise their gift cards back up to the system. And so they were able to earn about $2,000 a month in brand new incremental business from the barter economy. As those barter credits came into their account, they simply took 2,000 a month and applied it to their loan. So about two years later, their loan was paid off and it was all at their wholesale cost of food. Again, that $30, $40 cents on the dollar in that range. So not only did they save a ton of cash in that transaction, which was a huge boost to their business, they were able to again get a whole new client base coming to their restaurant, a whole new customer base. And yeah, the exposure, the overspend, the gift cards that didn't get redeemed, all the other benefits are still there. But just purely from a loan standpoint, being able to not have to come up or use that $25,000 in precious cash was very, very beneficial to them. And especially right now with the pandemic, businesses are even without the pandemic. It's hard for small businesses to get financing. Well, actually, with your example, they're with the restaurant. It's like, well, why couldn't they just get $25,000 a business right away, just to sell the gift cards? And the reason that they didn't want to do that in a way, obviously we're consulting with them as well, is that they didn't want that much barter traffic taking up their whole restaurant. They think people right now, where restaurants can only have so many people in and that type of thing, they can't add. Say, okay, well, you can have my whole thing because now you already need the cash flow. So the key was to say, okay, how much each month can you afford to take on a barter that's not then replacing other cash loans? Yeah, we don't want to interfere with their regular paying cash customers. Yeah, we just want to fill in the gaps and fill in the valleys with the barter credits. So yeah, it's really, you know, it makes no sense not to do a barter loan really during the day. Even if you've got the cash readily available, it makes more sense to conserve as much of that cash as possible. And obviously, offset the expenditure through a barter loan. So absolutely. I guess moving into another area where oftentimes finance is a tight, is the old charitable area. And where barter fits in for charities, obviously they have the gift and kind that they can take. But I know that that can cause them challenges at times in terms of how do they value it or how do they sell it or make use of it themselves. They've got the accounts like me in the background. How are we accounting for all of these gifts and kind or should we be giving a full receipt for this one or not or what value should that receive me and kind of where do you see barters sort of fitting into the charity room? Absolutely. Well, it's charities are really just businesses in a different way. So to speak, their organizations that have money coming in and money expenses going out and they want to take that profit and put it towards their costs. Right? And so it's super important that charities are very, you know, as fiscally responsible as they can be. And there's a lot of businesses that want to support charities, but they don't often have the extra cash, especially right now. They don't have the extra cash flow. And so they want to offer up gifts and kind, like you already mentioned. And so the problem with that is what if the gift and kind that the product or service they want to offer the charity of their choice doesn't need their particular product or service. So you're back to that whole coincidence and wants, right? They don't need what each other has at the same time or the same value. So in this case, the want of the business is I want to support the charity as opposed to I want to inform myself. Correct. Right. But the charity is like, ah, we don't know how to monetize what you want to give us. So this is a little bit of a tension there. And so yeah, like we've been, we're super, super happy and excited about this solution that we've been able to bring to the marketplace, which is called, in our case, it's called Barter Pay It Forward. And we have our own charitable foundation called the Barter Pay It Forward Foundation. And so we've got like, you know, thousands of businesses on the ecosystem over here who are utilizing Barter to boost their bottom line. Obviously, they're offering up their spare capacity, they're earning Barter credits, they're able to take those Barter credits and utilize them to offset cash expenditures. But we're also teaching them to give some to their community. In order to be competitive as a business in today's economy, you've got to be environmentally friendly, you've got to have ethical supply chains and you really have to be connected to your community, attracting and retaining talent is huge in that line of things. So how does a business actually give back to their community though if they don't have the cash to do it? So by leveraging the Barter Pay It Forward program, a business can now earn those Barter credits for their spare capacity. Take those Barter credits, use some for themselves and give some donate some to the Barter Pay It Forward Foundation. And then we give them a charitable tax receipt, one for one, as if it was a one for one gift and kind. Then our foundation, our charitable foundation is able to take those Barter credits and distribute them to all sorts of different charities across Canada and all the marketplaces that we operate in. And those charities take those Barter credits and then this is the best part because it's a closed loop system of reciprocity. They're able to spend them right back into the same ecosystem from where they were generated to offset their admin and overhead costs. So this literally allows a charity to conserve cash and take more of their precious donor dollars and put them towards the end cause versus those donor dollars offsetting admin and overhead costs. So it's a massive, massive opportunity for only charities but it also allows small or large businesses to even increase their donations because they have this increase budget but they can increase their donations or even start sort of a social impact plan of a corporate social responsibility. All these things are very, very important in the world of business. And it's especially because we kind of point out with that gift and kind it's hard outside of a Barter system to create that value for the gift and kind itself. Right, how do you evaluate? Charities are very concerned most of the time when they receive a gift and kind. How do I monetize it? How do I praise it? How do I receipt for it? They don't want to you know jeopardize their charitable status by you know issuing a receipt, a charitable receipt that wasn't the right value. And so by by teaching businesses to take their gifts and kind and monetize them into Barter credits, it sets an actual valuation of what that item is worth. Correct. And then they're donating the Barter credits, not the item. And then that flows back to the charities and it all works in a nice circle. Amazing conversation. It's been amazing just to kind of sort of set the stage in the groundwork, the framework, the foundation of why organized bartering makes sense for small to medium size and even some larger businesses. And so just to summarize, I mean there's so many benefits. Right, up, of how these businesses are able to benefit from organized bartering. You know, they're able to get new business, new brand new incremental business, new customers, it's a new revenue stream when they join a bartering system. They're able to obviously take those barter credits and utilize them to offset cash expenditures, which is a huge increase in cash flow. It's a boost to their bottom line. They're able to protect their margin. We talked about that. We're not having to discount and teach businesses and teach customers to shop only when there's discounts. So protecting that margin, it gives them more buying power in the marketplace when they're leveraging the barter system. We just talked about it being able to create more social impact. A huge importance. It's almost like creating a new budget to be able to create a social impact. Again, it's this whole idea of reciprocity. This infinite loop of how they've been able to actually offer up their service and then get things in exchange. This system of reciprocity, moving idle inventory is huge. Not having to pay for that warehouse space, being able to free up space in their retail store to bring in new goods, the more current goods and so on and so forth. Alternative financing, we just touched on that about the barter loans, access to alternative financing sources through being able to obtain a barter loan. It also ultimately creates additional budget. So when they're able to take their spare capacity, this unsold time and space, or idle inventory that's sitting on the shelf or in the warehouse, and they leverage the bartering ecosystem to create this new revenue stream, as these barter credits are coming into their account, they're able to create budgets for things that they might not have been able to afford. They would definitely have not have been able to afford for things like advertising, which when you take a barter credit and turn into an advertising or marketing spend, it's literally then leveraging that to drive brand new unsolicited cash business, Canadian dollar business back to that business, that small business. Employee incentives is a huge thing. We want to have a new budget for employee incentives, health and wellness, construction upgrades, adding on to your building, renovating your home, customer appreciation is a huge thing. Every business wants to get back to their customers, but doesn't necessarily have the cash flow to do it. By being able to barter, they're now able to take those barter credits and use them for customer appreciation, which creates loyalty and loyalty breeds more business, not only from them, but also from referrals. There's the whole marketing side. I mean, what business wants to put out harder cash for new websites or testing out new markets, new marketing strategies. It's very cost prohibitive to do that sometime, but being able to take barter credits and test new ideas in your business is so much more cost effective and less risky when it comes to spending those dollars. And then there's consulting. I mean, there's so many professionals that we deal with, whether it is CPAs or business consultants of some sorry, one that's in popular right now. Actually, in terms of an additional budget, that's what it is. Well, SEO, but also just the whole E-commerce, E-commerce, you're getting online at all, especially when you're dealing kind of small, medium sized business. A lot of them haven't really figured out how to fully tap online. They might have a website. They might have a bit of a store or whatever, but they haven't really fully built up what an online presence looks like with them. Or in some cases, they've been able to get consulting that's helped them kind of redirect their business a little bit during this time, where they can't do what they normally do, but they are able to consult or get themselves through an online platform. Yeah, exactly. Great point there. E-commerce is super, super important right now. So again, there's a myriad. There's hundreds of different ways that bartering can be worked into a business, all to their benefit. And yeah, it's an amazing opportunity for these businesses to actually leverage organized bartering to grow their business and boost their bottom line. I guess with that, now that we've covered the kind of boring, dry part of the presentation about what barter is, we can touch on accounting tax. That's less shift years to accounting tax. Good idea. So switching years into the whole accounting side of things, accounting for barter transactions, maybe just touch on obviously how accounting works into the mix for these types of transactions, both from a one on one bartering perspective and also from organized bartering exchanges. Sure. I mean, when you look at one on one transactions, for large corporations, it can be very complex because there's obviously the communications side of things. And if there's no paper trail or evidence that a transaction happened, how does the accounting crew even know to do anything? From a smaller business perspective, obviously, then you've got the communication is the entry-tie. But the requirement is still that you would account for it based on fair value. So then assessing okay, well, is it the fair value what I bought or the fair value what I sold, which you would hope would be the same. But sometimes the one will be more obvious in terms of like if you're dealing with a restaurant where they've given up something that's menu pricing, versus someone who would do something on a quote basis, obviously the menu pricing is easier to say, well, that's the price. And then when I'm thinking about a small business and I'm dealing with the transaction, I find it's easier to think about the two transactions as separate transactions, even though they've done together most often times with a smaller business when they're doing direct deals. But if you think of them as separate transactions and record them, almost that way with sort of a clearing account managing the middle, for most accounts of that would be by the easiest way to stay on top of them and keep track of them. Then we kind of would do like a multi-directional system. It becomes a lot simpler because the barter credits themselves are the values. So basically, you just try to treat each transaction as if they're a dollar. The members within the exchange will invoice each other for the transaction so you go, invoice register. Just he still applies, he just he or PST and provinces where PST applies. So apply to the whole transactions. Actually back into the other transactions sales tax and income tax also apply to one-to-one barter transactions as well which can be once again another trick of that part of it which once again makes it easier when you're working through an exchange. And it's changed a lot to be a full statement, probably transactions that you've done. And so therefore if you're missing an invoice it's easy. It's on my statement, I need to go find it. If you forget to keep track of a direct deal and someone still owes you on that, it's really hard to find that because a person's probably, I mean, it hopes will be ethical not to say, hey, I, I, I, you, you providing service, I still owe you. I have a there's not other responsibilities but there are these, they're busy too and they might forget. And if they if they've forgotten and not reminding you and you've forgotten, well then you've just given them value for nothing. Whereas with the multi-directional scenario you have stored, stored value, the statement saying what you've actually provided. And so that's something that's that's there. For most small and medium-sized businesses, they'll keep it simple. They set up the the barter account as a actual barter account within their books and records. Almost like another bank account. And you know that's a good, you say that because basically there if you're utilizing any of the sort of the common accounting software, it's like zero or quick bugs or sage, if you set it up as a bank account, what that does is means you can utilize the other modules with no changes. So basically it's a set you pour to sales the same way you process purchases the same way, but instead of picking your, whatever your scocean bank account, you're picking your barter bank account for the transaction. And then for the end of each year or whenever you're producing your statements, basically just reclassify the account. Because obviously it's not a bank account. So you wouldn't want it to show on your financial aid, it's a bank or cash, but just basically reclassify into another asset. Like other asset. Yeah, right, right. So it like operates like a bank account throughout the year in the system. Yep. At the end of the year, reclassify whether you have positive, barter credit balance or negative barter credit balance, if you're in a loan situation, yeah, it reclassifies it as an other asset. Well, your liability. Correct. Yeah, basically another like that. Yeah, it makes a lot of sense. So the general cremices don't weigh any different. Yeah, just add another bank account. All barter credits earned are considered revenue to the business. Yep. All barter credits spent are considered an expense to the business. Yep. And the barter exchange will issue a monthly statement, which itemizes all that activity, and no different than the accounting department would reconcile a Canadian dollar bank statement to the Canadian dollar bank account. Maybe simply reconcile the barter account statement to the barter bank account in their system. Sounds like I've taught you really well in the last 15 years. So you're doing really well there. Thank you. Thank you. I've been thinking about to say that a few times too. I've had to say that a number of times. So it's again, do nothing different. Literally just set up another bank account in your books and records of called barter or barter pay. In this case, if you're dealing with us, but yeah, absolutely so simple. I guess one area where it can become more complex is only within larger organizations. It's kind of a problem with the price versus cost analysis. And we were doing on transactions. This is the department. This is the departmental side of things. So basically where you're like, well, I've got a sales department, you say, sure, barter all you want. And because I'm getting all this credit for all this revenue over here. But the other side is looking at it. Well, I don't want to use the barter credit, even though I wanted to once in a year, I think of the taking an example where they basically the sales piece, like, well, we'll sell all these tickets. We'll do a direct trade with this electrical company for a sponsorship. And like the purchasing person who's responsible is going, well, okay, that credit's $100,000, let's say. And I've got to expense. I could pay $90,000 cash for or I can use your $100,000 credit that you've got through your little deal over there. Yeah. And they're like, well, I'm only evaluating based on my budget. And it's going to charge me at $100,000. Well, no, I'm going to use my $90,000, but if you're actually dealing with organizations as a whole, the sales department came up with this credit of $100,000. It's now just sitting there. Oh, going back to that new budget. Yeah, the barter deal created a new revenue stream. So basically, now, but now they're sitting on this electrical credit that they're not utilizing, which is now nothing really. And they're making a poor decision to go with a quote, unquote, cheaper quote at $90,000, but really, that's just money of the bank. Right. They're pulling $90,000 out of their regular sales. That's where the complexity comes in basically figuring out in the books and records, okay, well, how do we manage this for both departments so that both sides are making the right decisions? Both the sales department isn't, I'll say, over bartering stuff because it's easier to barter than this to sell with me in the economy in a regular way. And the purchasing department's making the right decisions because it's harder to barter, but it can be, it can be extra step. And if they don't want to take this, that they won't do it. And if the price versus cost analysis is off, so basically they don't make the right decisions. So I think our original one we had the sign guy who was doing the $5,500 sign full of barter, if they don't have the right tools in place from the accounting side to say that for their department that they're getting evaluated properly based on the barter. And so, usually we say is set up another department that is sort of the barter department. And almost like the selling department is selling to that department. And the buying department is buying from that department. And basically then as an executive team decides sort of what the valuation of the barter credits are going to be for making those decisions. Yeah, so you can make it the same, you can say, hey, you know what, for the value we're new, we're going to say it's going to be, you're only going to get credit for 50% of your sales and you're going to get credit for 50, or you're going to get charged with 50% of your purchases on barter. And so it's even, or you can say, well, actually let's try and make a profit through the barter center and say, okay, you're going to get credit for 50% of your sales and you're actually going to get credit for 60% of the cost or whatever. Yeah. And basically working it that way. So obviously that's a bigger, more complex conversation for a where you have multiple departments or multiple decision makers in one organization. Whereas if you have like one decision maker or if you have sort of an overall edict from the organization saying, no, if you can use barter, use barter, then that makes it simpler for an accounting standpoint. Because obviously then you can just do things directly straightforwardly. Yeah. Perfect. Great summary. Thank you. So now we've already talked about how when a business, any business, smaller, large, earns barter credits, they have to recognize that as revenue on the books, revenue to the business. But in terms of timing, how does that all play into it? Timing of revenue? Yeah. So basically revenue recognitions are obviously a big conversation with the accountants and sort of any revenue generating activity. In terms of the timing, it doesn't actually impact anything. So if you would, whenever you would recognize the revenue, if you've been getting paid in Canadian dollars, you do the same thing. The barter credits themselves are just sort of more of a form of payment as opposed to affecting the actual revenue recognition timing. So that's great to know. What about the valuation side? What if a business is not using their barter credits for what a reason? How does that all work? Yeah. So I mean, it doesn't happen unless they dot off and that's someone wouldn't use their barter credits. But if someone wasn't and if they were just sitting on a balance and it was extending over a long period of time and they're like, well, I'd never use them or whatever, then obviously a valuation of that comes up and saying, well, maybe we write them off. I mean, that's the same as if you were to have a bad receivables. I mean, then you'd write that off. But if you're within a barter exchange, you shouldn't be a place where you're writing off because there's always things you've been acquired through it. I mean, the same thing can happen somewhere in a direct, a contract, a thing where basically a relationship where basically you've taken on a contract deal where you're now sitting on a credit for somebody and you're looking at it going, okay, well, I haven't used this and you're kind of looking around. Now, two years of pass, I still haven't used this credit I have. At some point, the valuation of it comes into play. Something to play exactly. So yeah, I totally agree with that. That, you know, barter system's a barter account is meant to be a spending account, not a savings account, right? It's okay to stop pile cash and grow your cash bank account. But the actual value of bartering is really on the utilization of barter credits. You know, it's nice to get new business, it's nice to get those barter credits coming into the account. But really the actual true value of bartering is upon use replacing the expenditure. So like you said, there's very rare circumstances where they're not able to use it, but it does come up once in a while. I think one of the things that we've talked about is sort of the walk before you can run with it. So we don't try and ram as much barter through as you quest we can before you know, kind of generally how you operate with it as a business. So you have to figure out, okay, I'm a sped-ditter in this much barter. I'm not exactly going to use a savings dollar. It's not that type of level, but basically, MI as a business owner or business management team are we good at utilizing a barter. So what walk-through you run means to somebody could be very different. So if you have someone who's in that back cash-show standpoint, we talked before where they really need to turn that barter back into value of area zeroing expenditure, their walk is very slow. If you had somebody where they're like, okay, well, that cruise line way you mentioned. Her time was expiring no matter what happened. So making 70,000 barter crates made all the sense of the length of time might take to use them. Correct. Basically, it's that or nothing. So if you're in a that or nothing standpoint, walking looks an awful lot like running. But if you're in an area where you're not in that scenario, where your cash was really tight and you have to absorb additional cash costs to earn the barter, then obviously you want to walk. Because it's an evaluation of that one. I know all of our barter coaches would work with their clients in that way and basically figure out what that means. So for all this work that barter exchanges do, obviously we need to make money to revenue for our business. I'm going to ask you a second how that all kind of plays into the whole accounting side of doing the barter exchange. But I just want to touch on how we make money as a bartering system and how bartering systems actually make money. It's really purely based on a performance commission. So like I just mentioned, the benefit of a business to barter to utilize organized bartering is when they're able to utilize barter credits. So we actually only charge our performance commission when a business is utilizing barter credits. So that forces the barter exchange to have to do both sides of their job. Number one, the barter coaches come alongside these businesses to help them market their goods or services out to the network to earn those barter credits to turn that spare capacity into value. But that's only one half of their job. The more important half is really helping that business take that newly earned revenue stream and replace cash expenditures. And once that happens, it really drives up their cash flow because none of them have to pay Canadian dollars for that expenditure. They're just paying with barter credits. And once we've done both sides of our job, that's when we get our little performance commission on the back end, which just appears on the monthly statement and is built to a credit card. So how does a business sort of, what do they do with that accounting, the performance commission? Sure. So the way we generally just say is basically treat it as if it's an advertising expense. No matter how they utilize the barter credit, so sometimes it might be the owner might use it personally, which I think we're going to talk about a little later. But no matter what they use it for, basically, we use the commission's revenue revenue. So which isn't really revenue, well, it's revenue, but it's not really value until you've done both sides. But the actual expense itself should be treated as an advertising expense, no matter how the credits were utilized in the end. So just write as an advertising marketing expense. Wait, almost like a deferred sales commission, really? Sure. Yeah, absolutely. Makes sense. So shifting gears on how barter, how organized bartering relates to tax, right? Is bartering taxable? Is it organized bartering taxable? I'll give you a really short answer. Yes. No, I mean that was going to be answered. No, of course, the government wants to obviously, any economic activity to be taxable, and even if you're doing a direct trade, it's still taxable, basically, there would be both the, especially if the other side of the person, which I think we'll touch on in a minute in terms of the person within that multidirectional scenario. But if a business is doing a direct trade, and you're getting offensive in your house, well, you've actually been publishing the value of so they get what wants to do with the tax of appropriately. But in terms of multidirectional use, both the index tax credits apply as well as income tax. If you have a video of income over the course of a year, right? It would apply. So yeah, makes sense. Yeah. And the other thing too, with sort of a barter exchange, there's actually a registration that you have to run with the CRA whip for the designated barter exchange under the X-size tax act. And so obviously, we've registered or been designated. And obviously, what we're looking for is we're looking at a barter exchange. You want to make sure it's one that is designated. Absolutely. I would imagine, well, obviously, the CRA with even likes and champions, organized bartering, could actually take even some of the underground economy that occurs off the books and sort of formalizes it and puts it on paper. And because the barter credits are exchanging hands and at a one-to-one value, obviously transactions are being recorded. There's a full paper trail statement. monthly statements are being issued and it's fully auditable in that case. Yeah. So there's an audit trail book. I mean, both in the series standpoint, but I was a remote financial statement, audit perspective or management audit perspective. I'm not just necessarily negative on it from the CRA because no one wants one of those, but they do happen. Yeah. What about for the US side? I know there's something else. So the US side, basically, there is a, the US exchange is up to issue a 1099B, which gives basically a summary of all of the revenue that's gone into the barter account or positive dollars up into a barter account. So basically, some, some, some, some, some, some, some, some, some, some, some, barter sales. And then the CRA did a special sort of review of a barter of photo tech, a day to go and made a decision that there wasn't any need for that. But again, they felt that things were being accounted for properly. So you already mentioned this, but on the personal side. So I'm a business owner. Obviously, I'm offering up my goods or services, my spare capacity onto the barter pay system, a barter system. I'm able to bank those barter credits into my account. I'm obviously going to use them for my business related activities. But I'm also going to use them personally as well. How would a business owner account for that property? Sure. Well, I mean, the simplest way I think it is, if they have a shareholder account, it's basically tracking through that. So basically that they spend 5,000 barter credits that that will be tracked through that shareholder account. And then throughout the year to side, basically, whether or not that's going to be extra income or what's going to give it ends or maybe they had to the company actually owed the money, so basically that's going to be the form of repayment. And then the other alternative is obviously that the shareholder could repay that and not back the company, which I think might be as a good covering in terms of that. Absolutely. I'm there's so many hundreds of examples of this where business owners, what we're consulting with have taken our advice and literally are able to convert their barter credits into Canadian dollars at one for one just based on a personal expenditure that they're able to offset. So what I mean by that is when a business earns barter credits into their business account, obviously they're recording that as revenue to the business. But the fact is over here in their personal life, they're making a lot of buying choices, maybe it's a home renovation or buying a new vehicle or buying clothing or jewelry or whatever the case may be, they're hobby, whatever it is. And so business owners are constantly taking aftertacks personal dollars, personal Canadian dollars, and they're buying, let's just say, a new roof on their house for $10,000. Well, when they take that aftertacks personal cash and they go and spend it with their roofing company, is there a guarantee that the $10,000 cash that they give to their roofing company for their roof? Is there a guarantee that that roofing company is going to take that $10,000 in money and spend it back in their own business in the purchaser's business? Absolutely not. In fact, they may even take that money and spend it with someone else that's your competitor. And so, or this, their competitor. So at the end of the day, when a business owner can actually keep their personal aftertacks Canadian dollars in their account, in their personal bank account, take barter credits out of their company account and go buy their personal roof. What they do then is they just take the same $10,000 cash that they were going to give to their roofing company and they just write a check back to their own company and replenish that shareholder account. It's literally there's no adverse effect on their personal income. It was literally $10,000 came out of the company and $10,000 went back in. The benefit is though that they've turned $10,000 in barter credits right back into Canadian dollars at a one-to-one value. And that's a huge benefit for a business owner. So we've got, we've talked about the hundreds and hundreds of things that a business can barter for. Sure. Whether they're bartering their goods and services or the things that they can acquire, obviously, there's a very vast list of things that they can sell and or obtain through the organized bartering system. What about the shorter list of things? The things that can't be bartered for? Maybe touch on that for a second. Sure, I mean, the first thing is you shouldn't or can't part of for an Indian's elite. So it's something that's not legally, something you can't purchase legally in the Canadian economy, that being that you're bartering for doesn't policy make a leap. So heading in that case would be off limits. The other thing that you can't barter for is insurance premiums in Ontario and that's based on a ruling which probably shouldn't rule differently but that's okay. But insurance premiums are, I think, that they have spent specifically, you actually have to pay $8.4. Right. Underwriters want to make sure that there's Canadian dollars exchanging for those premiums. Yes, right. So that's the thing. And then another thing that comes up that you can't barter for but things with a really low margin are a lot harder barter for things like computers or stuff like that where there's small appliances. Yeah, that's kind of that is very hard to, not that it's impossible. We do get it as well through our exchange. Also, we get through direct exchanges but just using ads. Right. Yeah. Actually, maybe I should just touch on that for a second in terms of cost of goods and margins and that sort of thing. And so, what gap it means by that is like anything that has a high cost of goods or a low razor thin margin is generally a much harder thing to obtain through the barter system. Things like you just said, electronics, small appliances, even tires. So the fact is some of these product-based businesses when they choose to participate with barter, they're able to sell their goods onto the system but they have a bit of a higher cost associated with it. And so it becomes more cost prohibitive to do a lot all at once. Typically, they might be focusing on overstock, idle inventory. It's already what we call sunk cost merchandise. Those types of things are able to barter more of. But if I was to call up a tire store and say, hey, we need eight sets of tires for a delivery company and they have to be these specific tires, really that's going to be a transaction that more often than not a tire supplier isn't going to want to do in barter because they're having to actually fork over 60 to 80% of the value of that transaction in Canadian dollars to their supplier. So that sort of thing. So this is kind of scale of what we call the cost of goods sold scale. So every business has their cost of goods sold. And so typically it's easier for businesses on the lower end of the cost of goods sold scale, the higher profit margin businesses to do a lot more barter. But we do have businesses in every category. It just goes back to the mindset of the business owner. A tire dealer that loves the idea of barter, can make it work no matter what the math kind of lays out. But yeah, it's generally that's some of the principles behind sort of cost of goods and margins. But the key there is to only factor in your incremental cost. You don't want to be factoring in the fixed overhead of the business. Regardless of how many rooms a hotel sells in a night, they're going to be paying all of their property maintenance insurance and insurance for the building and front desk staff and salary employees and everything's a fixed overhead except for the incremental cost of turning over that empty room, which is new amenities, soap and plundering the sheets and cleaning the room. So that's the incremental cost. So when you're looking at a bartering transaction, a small business needs to only recognize their incremental cost of goods in the transaction, right? And not the fixed overhead. So it's super important. What about alcohol? I know that counts to come up once in a while in terms of your your licensee or if you're just a retail customer buying from a winery and crap, brewery, distillery, how does that play into it? It's fine and obviously you have to admit all your taxes and all your paperwork and place. But the barter aspect of it is the problem. Exactly. It goes back to recognizing it as revenue to the business, paying the appropriate tax to the appropriate agencies and just protruding like a regular transaction in the books. And obviously there are a particular, when they're selling your licensee, they have to make sure they put that paperwork in place. But once it's in place, it's fine. Yep, absolutely. One of the things that obviously has come up a lot lately and even over the last few years, is it's sort of like a council people and is there a way that barter can work into the council people you have in your normal business? Absolutely. No business likes to have a council's receivable, but they often do from time to time and unless you're in a cash business like a restaurant or something like that. But most businesses have receivables on the books and you know, cash is still king. So obviously any business would want to make their best effort to collect any outstanding receivable in Canadian dollars. But there are times where the the purchaser in the transaction isn't able to pay. They're asking for terms that are unreasonable. Or if you're just feeling like that, that receivable is about to slip into a bad debt. Collecting a receivable in barter credits is actually the best thing to do. So versus zero, again, it goes back to, you know, cash is still king, but barter is greater than zero. So if you're in a situation where you're dealing with some of your clients out there that are managing small businesses and have AR, one of the ways to collect receivables is in barter credits. So that's simply just teaming up with your barter coach, letting them know which businesses sort of owe you money, how much money they owe. And then they'll get back to you on if that's going to fit into the whole barter ecosystem, right? So there's certain businesses where it might not work, but most of the time it does work. So it could be that a signed company produced a sign for a restaurant and that restaurant owes the sign company $5,000. They're not paying the bill for whatever reason. Then we would suggest going in there and approaching them with the idea of either a direct trade to clear it up. So they can go to call up the restaurant and say, hey, you know what, you always buy a brand, we'll take five brand and gift district certificates directly, that, you know, zeros out the receivable. Then the signed company would take those gift cards either use some for themselves or they can resell them back through the barter ecosystem to earn barter credits so they can diversify their spending or they can actually have the barter coach contact their receivable directly, in this case, the restaurant and say, hey, you know, lift top of a barter and organize barter and we'll sort of give you a barter loan to fund the payout of the receivable to the signed company and then they can pay off that loan over time with with their own gift cards, right? It's a win-win-win scenario. So yeah, super, super important, if any business has AR and timing of that's really important because obviously if you wait to the point where it is actually too late, so the company's actually gone out of business. The barter opportunities exactly zero. Exactly. And your cash off the company is also zero. So yeah, so it's important that you catch that early enough that you haven't gone that way. And also sometimes they can be doing it to a customer who's like, they're accustomed really, really like working with them but they've just gotten in a bad shape because now obviously things, they do things, they do things, they may not even be their own fault. Yeah. And it turns to gives you an opportunity to have a reset with them and say, okay, well, let's reset what you currently owe in barter and then you don't have terms moving forward but at least we can work on the work with them. As the board is going well, the buyer from the last one has gone and now they're going off chasing some others with higher rates. Exactly. And they're buying from your competitors. Yeah. Right? What's really happening a lot now, especially because of COVID, is also the accounts payable bartering. Yeah. So this is where a member of barter pay in this case or any barter system actually owes money to a vendor, right? And so they feel bad about that that they don't have the cash flow to be able to pay that vendor. There's no harm in working with your barter coach on an AP deal where now that that business is being approaching their vendor and saying, hey, I can't pay you the $3,000 that I owe you in money that I could pay you right now today in barter credits. And as long as the business, the vendor in this case is able to find something that they need within the network, it's really no different than getting payment in Canadian dollars. So it really can solve a lot of problems both from the AR side and the AP side. But the general rule of thumb is look at those as viable solutions to utilizing and leveraging barter systems. For sure. Yeah. Another area that comes up, I'd say recently frequently, is the idea of real estate. And how does barter work into a real estate transaction? Yeah, real estate. It kind of goes back to the whole personal side of barter, right? Where we want to teach business owners to conserve personal cash barter for what they need from the business and then take the cash and pay it back to the company. So on the real estate side, it's quite simple. If I'm a business owner and I own my own home, obviously, I might own my own home and numerous other rental properties potentially. But at the end of the day, if I'm going to be doing a real estate transaction, I definitely want to look at bartering first and the barter ecosystem because there's realtors inside the barter pay system that are willing to take their commission in barter credits. So the way it works is, if I need to list my home, let's just say it's a million dollar home and I need to list that home. Typically, a real estate agent will come in and list my home and they'll write up the deal that it's a 2.5% listing commission and a 2.5% commission to the buying side. So it works no differently in the barter pay system except that there's just an additional deal that they make with the homeowner. And so the way it works is they come in, they write up the listing just like normal, but they have another document that they sign where upon the closing of the deal, when the commission's flow, so 25,000 flows through the listing agent and 25,000 flows through the buying agent, when that commission comes back out to the realtor, the realtor simply takes that $25,000 in this case and writes a check back to the homeowner, the barter customer, in exchange for barter credits, one for one. And you might ask, why would a realtor do that? Well, the realtor doesn't look at their giving up $25,000 in Canadian dollar commission. They look at it like they're picking up $25,000 in barter credit commissions because they wouldn't have had that deal otherwise, they've not been part of the ecosystem. And this is allowing a business owner when that transaction happens. Obviously, they're pulling those barter credits out of the company to exchange for the cash. And so it literally is like turning their barter credits right back into Canadian dollars one for one. And now they can take those Canadian dollars and spend them wherever they want in their business. It could be for salaries. It could be for all those things that we talked about, low margin goods or things that insurance premiums or that sort of thing is now being paid in Canadian dollars inadvertently through barter credits. So huge, huge opportunity on the buying side. If I'm a business owner that's going to go buy a home, a rental property has happened recently with one of our members and they went and spent $500,000 in on a new home. They didn't use a barter pay realtor because I didn't realize it was even a thing. And so in that case, if they had used a barter pay realtor, they could have exchanged that two and a half percent. So when the realtor represents them, writes up the list or so writes up the offer, again, two and a half percent is coming to that realtor. That realtor in the barter pay idea would actually take the two and a half percent and write a check back to the barter pay member and exchange for barter credits. So it would really have been beneficial, but they missed that one, but they won't miss it again. I guess for sure. Now that they've missed on the opportunity to exchange $12,500 barter credits for $12,500 Canadian, obviously that's not going to happen again. They're going to take advantage of it every time. So yeah, totally works for real estate. Okay, so we've always covered a lot of material today in terms of both why is when we want a barter and then how would they deal with it, accounting attacks wise and just a few other topics. But I guess one of the things that I'm sure some people are wondering is okay, across Ontario, if they're in their market and they say, if they will, I'm looking for a barter exchange either for myself or for members or clients or friends or family who knows, what should they be looking for in a barter exchange? So yeah, if obviously CPA listening in, obviously they're dealing with a lot of small businesses, how would they advise one of their clients on what to look for in a barter or company? Really, really great question. I'm just going to talk to the audience here about that because they're actually advising these businesses in their service influence about how this bartering might work into their business. So first and foremost, you want to make sure that the barter exchange is registered with the CRA as a designated barter company under the Excise Tax Act. Number two, making sure that that barter exchange has a strong transaction, what we call kind of velocity of money, velocity of barter credits, making sure that there's actual transactions happening on a regular basis between all the members in other words, an active economy of participating businesses. We want to make sure that they're investing into technology. Are they taking their performance commission and reinvesting it into technology to make things easier for businesses to connect and conduct barter transactions? Reach is super important. Are they in multiple markets across the country? Are they expanding? Are they showing growth curve sort of thing to make sure that any business that joins that barter ecosystem actually can market their goods and services into new markets or acquire goods and services, travel, that sort of thing. The number of members, do they have one member? Are they just starting out? Do they have 10? Do they have 4,000 like barter pay and growing a growing barter system is a very healthy barter system because members are being attracted into that ecosystem to do business? Are they partnered with organizations? Do they have partnerships in place? Partnerships are super important because by dealing and having strong partnerships on the provincial or national level, it's actually helping that barter exchange grow and expand. So it goes back to the whole or the whole row side. Obviously rep requests come up from businesses and no barter exchange is going to have everything all the time. If they're not growing and have somebody or people who are in place to grow the network, then they can't fulfill those requests that aren't available within the system. It is a very important thing to have the growth. Super important. Barter coaches is there a very strong ratio of barter coaches to members as much as we're a technology company that runs our back end sort of the exchange of barter coaches? I don't want to say a ratio. That's obviously internal to us what we mean by it, but they might not know. Yeah, I think 150 businesses in a portfolio for a barter coach is the perfect sort of number, 150 to 200 max. That's what a barter coach can handle properly in building relationships, strong relationships. Obviously it's getting into bigger businesses if that might drop down. That's not about the small, medium-sized. Absolutely. Yeah. So you want to make sure that there's a strong team behind within the barter ecosystem to make sure that every business is getting taking care of in that 150 to 200 per barter coach sort of ratio. Is there a strong advertising and marketing department inside the barter system? Because obviously one of the most important things that we do as a barter exchange is actually help market the goods and services of our members to other members to bring in that incremental revenue. Is there a marketing or graphic design part function within that barter system? It's obviously going to create a much easier. Whatever method they have for marketing internally based me for services, they've got a good model where that works. Absolutely. Media, are they being talked about in the media? I mean earned media on stories about the whole sort of barter ecosystems is a strong indication that they're making themselves heard. They're making some waves in the media in a very positive way. And obviously it's a story to be told. So Google, you know, barter, Canada or whatever and see the stories that are in the media of certain companies, longevity, how long have they been in business? Again, are they brand new? Now, they don't say a bad thing, but a barter company has been around for a long time and has that longevity, that history, that they've been through it all kind of there and they've kind of stuck with it. Again, all these other things, the growth curve and whatnot. And I'll end off with social impact. Is that barter exchange also helping to get back to the community? That's super important to kind of complete the whole cycle. And so that's kind of the general list that I kind of run through when I'm talking to somebody. And yeah, it's just making sure that most of those boxes are checked off and you should be in pretty good shape. So on behalf of Gavin and myself, we really appreciate you spending the last hour with us to learn about organized bartering. If you want to get in touch with us, feel free to reach out at any time. We'd be glad to hop on a quick call and have a further chat. So first, can you tell me about Imagine Canada? Sure, we are a national registered charity whose business is to work with on behalf of Canada's 86,000 registered charities, 90,000 nonprofits, and 7,000 social entrepreneurs to make sure the operating environment is as good as it can possibly be so that they can deliver services to Canadians. How did you get involved with barter pay? Well, it was actually a conversation through a mutual business colleague, a company that we have used for many years on the public relations front was also doing work with barter pay. When they had heard of the concept thought, I wonder if it would actually work for charities. And so just did an introduction and then once we sort of got John and Debbie's enthusiasm and really the vision for what they were trying to accomplish, I just went from there. What is it about that vision and their enthusiasm that made you want to get involved in work with them? Well, I think first of all, it's always great to work with people who are passionate about what they do. But more importantly, it was incredibly smart. And as we seek to find new ways for businesses to participate with charities and nonprofits, this was just a really well thought out instrument or mechanism that can open up an entire new way of doing business between the private sector and then offer profit sector. And in a world where charities are struggling for the resources they need to deliver the services for Canadians, having an entire new avenue open up, it's just amazing. How exciting is it to have a system like this that takes business waste and downtime and actually put it to good use? Well, it's interesting because quite often one of the challenges for businesses is that they're either too busy, they don't want to deeply discount their profit leaders, but finding a system that actually makes money for them in areas where they might have written things on them. A makes great fiscal sense. It removes a barrier. It removes a barrier of that kind of conversation. And in many cases, the services that they provide, the products that they might have to move are the kinds of things that charitable organizations are looking for. How does it feel tonight to hear these sort of stories and see how this local community has been impacted by Bogger Pay Forward? Well, the word for me is hopeful because lots of great ideas start somewhere and because the mandate of Imagine Canada is nationwide. To witness, I call it the birth, even though it's been around for a while, but really the birth of the Barter Pay Forward component, it's very hopeful to think that celebrations like these could be taking place in different parts of the country in the not-too-distant future. Can you see more and more charities getting on board with something like this? I mean, we heard such great feedback from the ones we're here tonight. Absolutely, and I think hopefully that's one of the contributions that an organization like Imagine Canada can make, where we can help spread the word amongst charities because they're always looking for new and innovative ways of doing business. And I think it's just a matter of time before they hear about this and say, this is the kind of thing that would really work for us. Anything else you want to add? Well, just that we're incredibly grateful for the vision that's been shown. And the other thing that I find really intriguing about this is that the Marriage of Barter Pay and the Barter Pay Forward Foundation is building this kind of thinking in the DNA of the company. If we have more companies in Canada who think intentionally about how they work with the community, this will strengthen the Canada's charitable sector.